Rear Admiral Grace Murray Hopper (December 9, 1906 - January 1, 1992) 
was an American computer scientist and United States Navy officer. A 
pioneer in the field, she was one of the first programmers of the 
Harvard Mark I computer, and developed the first compiler for a computer 
programming language. She conceptualized the idea of machine-independent 
programming languages, which led to the development of COBOL, one of the 
first modern programming languages. She is credited with popularizing 
the term "debugging" for fixing computer glitches (motivated by an 
actual moth removed from the computer, and not by her). Due to the 
breadth of her accomplishments and her naval rank, she is sometimes 
referred to as "Amazing Grace." The U.S. Navy destroyer USS Hopper 
(DDG-70) is named for her, as was the Cray XE6 "Hopper" supercomputer at 
NERSC.

Hopper was born Grace Brewster Murray in New York City. She was the 
oldest in a family of three children. She was curious as a child, a 
lifelong trait. At the age of seven she decided to determine how an 
alarm clock worked. She dismantled seven alarm clocks before her mother 
realized what she was doing; she was then limited to one clock. For her 
preparatory school education, she attended the Hartridge School in 
Plainfield, New Jersey. Rejected for early admission to Vassar College 
at age 16 (her test scores in Latin were too low), she was admitted the 
following year. She graduated Phi Beta Kappa from Vassar in 1928 with a 
bachelor's degree in mathematics and physics and earned her Master's 
degree at Yale University in 1930.
 
In 1934, she earned a Ph.D. in mathematics from Yale under the direction 
of Oystein Ore. Her dissertation, "New Types of Irreducibility 
Criteria", was published that same year. Hopper began teaching 
mathematics at Vassar in 1931, and was promoted to associate professor 
in 1941.
 
She was married to New York University professor Vincent Foster Hopper 
(1906 - 1976) from 1930 until their divorce in 1945. She never remarried, 
and she kept his surname.

In 1943, Hopper obtained a leave of absence from Vassar and was sworn in 
to the United States Navy Reserve, one of many women to volunteer to 
serve in the WAVES. She had to get an exemption to enlist; she was 15 
pounds (6.8 kg) below the Navy minimum weight of 120 pounds (54 kg). She 
reported in December and trained at the Naval Reserve Midshipmen's 
School at Smith College in Northampton, Massachusetts. Hopper graduated 
first in her class in 1944, and was assigned to the Bureau of Ships 
Computation Project at Harvard University as a lieutenant, junior grade. 
She served on the Mark I computer programming staff headed by Howard H. 
Aiken. Hopper and Aiken coauthored three papers on the Mark I, also 
known as the Automatic Sequence Controlled Calculator. Hopper's request 
to transfer to the regular Navy at the end of the war was declined due 
to her age (38). She continued to serve in the Navy Reserve. Hopper 
remained at the Harvard Computation Lab until 1949, turning down a full 
professorship at Vassar in favor of working as a research fellow under a 
Navy contract at Harvard.

In 1949, Hopper became an employee of the Eckert-Mauchly Computer 
Corporation as a senior mathematician and joined the team developing the 
UNIVAC I. In the early 1950s the company was taken over by the Remington 
Rand corporation and it was while she was working for them that her 
original compiler work was done. The compiler was known as the A 
compiler and its first version was A-0.
 
In 1952 she had an operational compiler. "Nobody believed that," she 
said. "I had a running compiler and nobody would touch it. They told me 
computers could only do arithmetic."
 
In 1954 Hopper was named the company's first director of automatic 
programming, and her department released some of the first 
compiler-based programming languages, including ARITH-MATIC, MATH-MATIC 
and FLOW-MATIC.

In the spring of 1959 a two day conference known as the CODASYL brought 
together computer experts from industry and government. Hopper served as 
the technical consultant to the committee, and many of her former 
employees served on the short-term committee that defined the new 
language COBOL. The new language extended Hopper's FLOW-MATIC language 
with some ideas from the IBM equivalent, COMTRAN. Hopper's belief that 
programs should be written in a language that was close to English 
rather than in machine code or languages close to machine code (such as 
assembly language) was captured in the new business language, and COBOL 
would go on to be the most ubiquitous business language to date.
 
From 1967 to 1977, Hopper served as the director of the Navy Programming 
Languages Group in the Navy's Office of Information Systems Planning and 
was promoted to the rank of captain in 1973. She developed validation 
software for COBOL and its compiler as part of a COBOL standardization 
program for the entire Navy.

In the 1970s, Hopper advocated for the Defense Department to replace 
large, centralized systems with networks of small, distributed 
computers. Any user on any computer node could access common databases 
located on the network. She pioneered the implementation of standards 
for testing computer systems and components, most significantly for 
early programming languages such as FORTRAN and COBOL. The Navy tests 
for conformance to these standards led to significant convergence among 
the programming language dialects of the major computer vendors. In the 
1980s, these tests (and their official administration) were assumed by 
the National Bureau of Standards (NBS), known today as the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

Hopper retired from the Naval Reserve with the rank of commander at the 
end of 1966. She was recalled to active duty in August 1967 for a 
six-month period that turned into an indefinite assignment. She again 
retired in 1971, but was asked to return to active duty again in 1972. 
She was promoted to captain in 1973 by Admiral Elmo R. Zumwalt, Jr.
 
After Rep. Philip Crane saw her on a March 1983 segment of 60 Minutes, 
he championed H.J.Res. 341, a joint resolution in the House of 
Representatives which led to her promotion to commodore by special 
Presidential appointment. In 1985, the rank of commodore was renamed 
rear admiral, lower half. She retired (involuntarily) from the Navy on 
August 14, 1986. At a celebration held in Boston on the USS Constitution 
to celebrate her retirement, Hopper was awarded the Defense 
Distinguished Service Medal, the highest non-combat award possible by 
the Department of Defense. At the time of her retirement, she was the 
oldest commissioned officer in the United States Navy (79 years, eight 
months and five days), and aboard the oldest commissioned ship in the 
United States Navy (188 years, nine months and 23 days).
 
She was then hired as a senior consultant to Digital Equipment 
Corporation, a position she retained until her death in 1992, aged 85.
 
Her primary activity in this capacity was as a goodwill ambassador, 
lecturing widely on the early days of computers, her career, and on 
efforts that computer vendors could take to make life easier for their 
users. She visited a large fraction of Digital's engineering facilities, 
where she generally received a standing ovation at the conclusion of her 
remarks. She was an interesting and engaging speaker, and the most 
memorable part of these talks was her illustration of a nanosecond. She 
salvaged an obsolete Bell System 25 pair telephone cable, cut it to 11.8 
inch (30 cm) lengths (which is the distance that light travels in one 
nanosecond) and handed out the individual wires to her listeners. 
Although no longer a serving officer, she always wore her Navy full 
dress uniform to these lectures.
 
"The most important thing I've accomplished, other than building the 
compiler, is training young people. They come to me, you know, and say, 
'Do you think we can do this?' I say, 'Try it.' And I back 'em up. They 
need that. I keep track of them as they get older and I stir 'em up at 
intervals so they don't forget to take chances."
 
She was laid to rest with full military honors in Arlington National 
Cemetery.